# How-to-Detect-Spice-Adulteration-
 Spices are the heart and soul of Indian cuisine and they form the foundation of practically every Indian meal. However, when using these spices in every dish, we pay little attention to the fact that they can be contaminated, causing more harm than good to your health. As a result, it’s best to be aware of impurities when purchasing spices.  Food contamination occurrences have been significantly increasing since 2018, and they are surging as a result of the current epidemic. To boost the quantity of spices sold in the spice market, several merchants mix foreign substances into the ground spices. False colours and dust are the most common substances discovered in spices, as they may enhance the quantity while quickly blending into the spices, making it nearly impossible to distinguish. Adulterated spices, on the other hand, can impair the taste of a dish by being flavourless and bland, whereas pure and unadulterated spices can provide excellent zest and flavour.  But most of the time, it has been seen that many of you utilize low-quality spices, so you can’t ignore the possibility that they’re compromised. As a result, it is recommended that you purchase whole spices and then roast and grind them at home. Then this will guarantee that the spices are of great quality. However, for other people, this is too much work and they simply buy ground spices from the market. We’ll go over how to tell whether your spices have been tampered with so you can get fresh and pure spices.  Here are a few handy tips to check the adulteration in the spices:  Red Chilli Powder:  Red Chili Powder is an essential ingredient in Indian cuisine, and no meal would be complete without it. However, several contaminants such as artificial color, brick powder, saw dust and starch can be detected in Red Chili Powder.  How to check?  ● Fill a clear glass halfway with water and add a tablespoon of red chilli powder.  ● The sawdust will float on top of the pure chilli powder, which will settle at the bottom of the glass.  ● Furthermore, if the powder has an artificial colour, it will fall in colour streaks.  Turmeric Powder:  Turmeric is a medicinal spice that is used to treat colds and coughs at home. Artificial colour, chalk powder, Metanil Yellow and lead chromate are frequently found in it.  How to check?  ● In a glass filled with water, put 1 tbsp. put turmeric powder in and leave it alone for 10 minutes.  ● The pure powder will sink to the bottom of the glass, leaving a pale yellow stripe in the water.  ● It’s also polluting if the powder settles in a bright yellow colour.  Black Pepper:  Black pepper has a wrinkled surface and a robust aroma and flavour. To increase the quantity, papaya seeds and light berries are generally combined with black peppercorns.  How to check?  ● Add a few peppercorns to a glass of water and leave it undisturbed for 5 minutes.  ● The black peppercorns at the bottom are black pepper, while the papaya seeds floating on top are papaya seeds.  ● Light berries can also be distinguished because they split easily when pressed.  Asafoetida:  Despite the fact that India is the world’s greatest consumer of asafoetida, we import it from many other countries such as Afghanistan, Iran etc. Substances such as soapstone and starch are used to contaminate Asafoetida.  How to check?  ● Add roughly a teaspoon of powdered Asafoetida to a glass of water and mix well.  ● If no particles remain at the bottom of the glass after carefully mixing, the hing is pure.  ● If the powder contains any artificial colour, it will create coloured traces.  Cloves:  Cloves are a flower-shaped spice that is equally appealing in both whole and ground form. This unique spice gives hot beverages, cookies and cakes a particular flavour.  How to check?  ● Cloves that have been coated in toxic mineral oils emit a kerosene-like odour.  ● You can also tell the difference between fresh and exhausted cloves by immersing them in water.  Here are a few pointers to bear in mind when purchasing spices:  ● If at all possible, avoid buying spices in bulk. They have a significant risk of being tampered with.  ● Make sure there is an FSSAI license on the premises. The brands that receive this license adhere to the government’s minimum food safety guidelines.  ● Before purchasing any blended spices, double-check the ingredient list.  Conclusion:  Fresh, contaminant-free spices not only add a fragrant flavour and taste to food, but they also have a number of health benefits. Shalimar’s Chef Spices and Shalimar’s Popular Spices are 100% original and fresh which has been trusted for years. These spices are available for purchase on our website as well as on e-commerce sites such as Flipkart and Amazon.
